# Audio Interface

The concept of a soundcard is more of an early 90s thing, where you had the [Sound Blaster 16](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sound_Blaster_16). Personal computers
did not necessarily have audio built in; at most you got a PC speaker which could make simple monophonic beeps. Nowadays, this card has been miniaturized to a single 
chip on the motherboard which is just powerful enough to handle music playback and microphone input; but let's just still call it the soundcard, because that's easy.

An audio interface is simply a soundcard for music production.

# Why get one

Your computer likely has a single small [3.5mm input](Audio-inputs-outputs.md) on the front. It's for microphone input and stereo output at the same time.

Synthesizers tend to have 6.35 mm outputs which won't fit (at least not without an adapter) into this plug; and worse, since it's a microphone input, the synth's level
will be too high. 

There are two main reasons to get an audio interface.

## Professional connectors for all your gear

You can connect microphones with an XLR cable. There will be preamps built in which amplify the signal, and for 
[condenser microphones](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microphone), phantom power. If the interface has enough inputs, you don't even need a mixing desk.

Bigger interfaces tend to have 5-pin [MIDI](MIDI.md) available, which lets you connect to older gear without needing to buy a MIDI interface.

## Drivers with low latency

When you use the default soundcard of your computer and a piece of software wants to send audio to it - such as a media player - Windows will handle things. For a 
DVD or an mp3, it doesn't matter much if the music starts 300 milliseconds after you've pressed the button; this delay is acceptable.

This is called latency; the time difference between pressing a button (or key) and hearing a sound.

For using your computer as an instrument, it is not acceptable at all. The ASIO drivers (or CoreAudio drivers in case of MacOS) allow software (often the [plugin host](Plugin-Host.md) 
to send data there directly without having to negotiate with the OS about priority.

While audio is still generated by your CPU (unless you're running something like an [UAD](https://www.uaudio.com/uad-accelerators.html) which runs its plugins 
on a DSP coprocessor - effectively just offloading CPU power), the fact that it can get to the audio interface faster makes plugins feel more like instruments.

# How to choose

The quality of an audio interface is in the support and drivers. Conversion is something you can worry a lot about - but first and foremost, drivers should be kept up 
to date with every OS release and preferably for longer than that the product is sold.

An audio interface with sufficient inputs lets you replace a mixer. You can record every instrument individually and simultaneously, much like a
multi-track tape recorder. This route is flexible; you can compose all your songs in MIDI only and then record every part in a single go.

Figure out how many synthesizers or pieces of equipment you want to connect simultaneously, and then buy something with enough inputs for that. Better; add a few spare inputs.
In most cases the number of inputs will be equal to the number of outputs (so 8 in, 8 out).

# Marketing and ADAT 

[The Focusrite 18i20 claims to have 18 inputs and 20 outputs](https://focusrite.com/products/scarlett-18i20). However, looking on the back only shows 2 inputs 
on the front and 6 on the back.

Still - it's true. The thing is that 8 of those inputs are ADAT inputs. This means you need to buy an additional [ADAT](Audio-inputs-outputs.md) converter such as the Behringer ADA8200 to 
get the full set of analog inputs available.

This is often the case with interfaces such as these. Getting a high number of [6.35mm](Audio-inputs-outputs.md) is not cheap. In professional studios, this is handled 
differently; for consumer equipment, ADAT is a cheap way to pump the numbers.

So, while it's not deceit per se - keep in mind that getting the full set requires making an additional purchase.

# Outputs

While having 8 inputs is obviously useful, having 8 outputs as well is perhaps more of a head-scratcher. A good audio interface lets you route audio out of these - 
and now you can use external effects (such as pedals) to process plugins, recorded audio or your instruments. All you need is to loop it back to the input again.
